---
layout: post
title:  "A Reminder"
excerpt: Liminality (derived from the Latin Urnen, meaning doorway or threshold) is a word used to describe a phase when the old isn't working but the new has not yet come to replace it - Howard Sasportas
categories: [personal]
---
One of my close friends was struggling through a rough patch recently. So as any good friend should do, I tried my hand at giving them a bit of advice, and this is just a consolidation of my thoughts from that process.

It would be massively irresponsible for me to suggest that you can improve let alone 180 yourself by following my words. It goes without saying that everyone must deal with their own problems and fight their own demons differently. I do believe however that this experience is common enough that this can impact people. There are also definitely people more experienced and more wise, and this is nothing new or novel so it is a certainty that many have already actualized this advice successfully, in which case I’m extremely happy for you. But I believe there might still be something in this for you to take away, because this process in its essence is one of perpetual self-examination. I am sometimes but not always examining myself, because it is an easy thing to forget to do. I am sometimes but not always improving myself, because I am only human. One must, funnily enough, examine themselves on whether they are examining themselves frequently enough. Sometimes what we need is a little reminder. That will undoubtedly include me returning to these words later in my life to receive that reminder.

I won’t give you some superficial advice like just keep working on yourself and everything will turn out. My process started with me realizing that I had a problem. Like any good Alcoholics Anonymous meeting will tell you, the first step to solving an alcohol problem is realizing you have one. Now I know, and knowing is half the battle. My problem is not one with alcohol, thankfully, but rather one with my feelings. 

I realized that I had feelings that I didn’t know were problematic. 

Feelings in general are something that I failed to appreciate for far too long. Now hear me out on what I mean by this: there’s a distinction to be made between shallower feelings, those that we get to encounter pretty regularly, and deeper feelings, those that are embedded extremely deep inside of you that you don't get the chance to see very often. And there are often deeper feelings that encompass things like resentment you harbor towards people close to you in your life, or feelings about your confidence and deeper insecurities, and smaller pettier feelings, which accumulate very quickly to your detriment. They create a sensation of tightness in your chest that you can’t seem to find the source of, a burden on your shoulders you’re forced to carry everywhere that you just accept as added weight as a result of growing. But worst of all later down the line, they create regret, the severity of which grows exponentially over time as the feelings are left unaddressed. Most people go about their whole lives not giving these feelings any time of day. As a coping mechanism, the feelings become suppressed and it's extremely toxic to keep inside of yourself. It changes the way you behave daily without you even realizing. You’ll find that even the most trivial of things you do become tainted by these feelings. Every time your mind happens across something adjacent to that feeling, your thought process meets a kink in the path and takes sharp 90 degree turns, where there should instead be a smooth edge. All of those small kinks add up to make your interactions and encounters on a day to day basis colorless, dispassionate, and significantly less enjoyable. 

The biggest thing is just to sit down and take some time to examine these feelings. Work them out for yourself or even with others in your life that you trust and value, because nobody should have to go through this alone.

There's actually very little in your life that you aren't in control of when you start doing this, because every time you neglect to confront these feelings, you cede some control to them. 

If you needed to hear that advice, I’m glad. If you’re already successfully actualizing this, I’m glad. If this served as a reminder to examine some of your more recent feelings, I’m also glad. Again, this was just a consolidation of some thoughts I had, putting pen to paper after an instance in my life where I was helping a friend out.

As an aside about where I’m at right now, I personally get the feeling that I’m somewhat in the middle of two lives with how I’m doing now compared to how I was doing before. I imagine that’s a pretty common experience for those starting uni, where a lot of us say that this is the time to rebrand ourselves. It’s a time for a fresh start and a clean slate. I am a sophomore, so this is primarily accounting for the fact that COVID had all of us remote last year. There are however two drastically different ways you can go about this “fresh start''. One of them involves changing yourself for the sake of changing yourself, which pretty quickly leads down the path of impostor syndrome. The other involves changing yourself because you realized there were changes you needed to make. My mother sat me down for a heart-to-heart once and gave me advice which at the time I didn’t appreciate the value of. “Stay true to yourself, Justin” she would say. At the time I interpreted this to mean simply being honest and not telling lies to other people. The essence of the advice that completely flew over my head is that this has nothing to do with outward appearances at all.

