---
layout: post
title:  "Examine Your Feelings"
excerpt: "Some advice I gave friends that were feeling down recently"
categories: [personal]
---

I'm going to try something a little new for this post. 

Some of my close friends were struggling through a rough patch recently. They were in the trenches if you will. So I tried my hand at giving them a bit of advice, and I guess this is just a bit of a consolidation of my thoughts from that process.

I've debated for a long time whether it would be appropriate to post some more personal material on this site of mine, or whether I'd just come off as some sort of holier-than-thou character by delving into these areas. The more I thought about these feelings, the more I realized this was just me overthinking trivial stuff about my outward appearance, as per usual. In reality, I should only come off as that if my words were hollow, which I don't believe to be the case. In any case, I'll let you be the judge of that.

My life has recently been on the upswing actually. I've been in a pretty good headspace. I'm meeting really cool people in my life. I'm excelling academically in a challenging program. I recently published my first research paper as a co-author. All of these things are me working towards something that you might call self-actualization. I firmly believe that I’m at my happiest when I’m working towards my personal conception of self-actualization, and I’m really glad that this is my top priority in life. I’m really glad that I know what I want.

And I’m also glad that, if you were to ask me, I could pinpoint the moment in my life where things started looking up for me.

As a disclaimer, it would be massively irresponsible for me to suggest that you can 180 your own life by following my words in lockstep. It goes without saying that everyone deals with their own problems and fights their own demons. I do believe however that my experience is common enough that this advice can impact people. There are also definitely people more experienced and more wise than me, so I am also certain that many have already gone through a similar process successfully, in which case I’m extremely happy for you. But I believe there might still be something in this for you, because this process in its essence is one of self-examination. And I am sometimes but not always evaluating myself, because it is an easy thing to forget to do. I am sometimes but not always improving myself, because I am only human. One must, funnily enough, evaluate themselves on whether they are evaluating themselves frequently enough. Sometimes what we need is a little reminder. That will undoubtedly include me coming back to this post later in my life to receive that reminder.

I won’t give you some superficial advice like just keep working on yourself and everything will turn out. My process started with me realizing that I had a problem. Like any good Alcoholics Anonymous meeting will tell you, the first step to solving an alcohol problem is realizing you have one. My problem is not one with alcohol, thank the heavens, but rather as the title of this post suggests, one with my feelings. 

I realized that I had feelings. 

Something that I failed to appreciate for far too long. Now hear me out on what I mean by this: there’s a distinction to be made between shallower feelings, those that we get to encounter pretty regularly and sometimes get the chance to examine, and deeper feelings, those that are embedded extremely deep inside of you that you don't get the chance to see very often. And these are things like resentment you harbor towards people close to you in your life, or feelings about your confidence and deeper insecurities, and smaller pettier feelings, which accumulate very quickly to your detriment. They create a sensation of tightness in your chest, a burden on your shoulders you’re forced to carry everywhere, but worst of all, later down the line, they create regrets, the severity of which grows exponentially as the feelings are left unaddressed. I’d wager that most people go about their whole lives not giving these feelings any time of day. As a coping mechanism, the feelings become suppressed and it's extremely toxic stuff to keep inside of yourself. It changes the way you behave daily without you even realizing. You’ll find that even the most trivial of things you do throughout the day become tainted by these feelings. Every time your mind happens across something adjacent to that feeling, your thought process meets a kink in the road and takes sharp 90 degree turns, where there should be a smooth edge in there. All of those small kinks add up to make your interactions and encounters on a day to day basis colorless, dispassionate, and significantly less enjoyable. 

The biggest thing is just to sit down and take some time to examine these feelings. Work them out for yourself or even with others in your life that you trust and value, because nobody should go through this alone.

There's actually very little in your life that you aren't in control of when you start doing this. You genuinely start seeing the world with more color, I absolutely guarantee you that.

I personally get the feeling that I’m somewhat in the middle of two lives with how well I’m doing now compared to how I was doing before, which was just more or less level. I imagine that’s a pretty common feeling for someone starting university, where a lot of us say that this is the time to rebrand ourselves. It’s a time for a fresh start and a clean slate. I am a sophomore, so this is primarily accounting for the fact that COVID had all of us remote last year. There are however two drastically different ways you can go about this “fresh start''. One of them involves changing yourself for the sake of changing yourself. The other involves changing yourself because you realized there were changes you needed to make. My mother sat me down for a heart-to-heart once and gave me advice which at the time I didn’t know just how valuable it would be. “Stay true to yourself, Justin” she would say. At the time I interpreted this to mean simply being honest and not telling lies to other people. The essence of the advice that I missed is that this has nothing to do with outward appearances at all, but rather staying true to your core values when nobody’s looking. I believe I’m still true to myself. 

Hopefully that massive quote I have plastered on my sidebar hits a little differently.
